November 2nd 2007 Missouri Air National
Guard f-15c broke up in flight near boss
Missouri the pilot major Steven
Stillwell suffered a dislocated left
shoulder and shattered bone in his upper
left arm during the break-up but
successfully ejected from the airborne
wreckage loss of the 41 million dollar
fighter led Air Force officials on
November 3rd 2007 to temporarily ground
its fleet of more than 600 f-15s until
an investigation could show cause for
the in-flight breakup the McDonnell
Douglas f-15 Eagle is an all-weather
tactical fighter designed to gain and
maintain air supremacy over the
battlefield was first delivered in
November of 1974 and has since seen a
variety of model designations from A to
E C and D models produced more than
46,000 pounds of thrust close to the
weight of the aircraft plus half of its
fuel capacity at fifteen flew in the
Persian Gulf in 1991 in support of
Operation Desert Storm where C model
fighters accounted for 34 if the Air
Force's 37 air-to-air victories equal is
battle tested on its airframe has
displayed supreme integrity during one
training flight similar to the one shown
here and f-15 was struck by another
aircraft shearing off the Eagles right
wing nearly at its root the pilot of
that Eagle flying on one wing was able
to return the aircraft touching down
safely on the runway close to 250 miles
per hour roughly twice the 15s normal
landing speed nonetheless investigators
focusing on the November 2007 breakup
quickly found that indeed the aircraft
structure had failed in flight borne of
the investigation Air Force animation
depicts critical elements of the event
the image here shows the crash
aircraft's flight path and the lighter
color on the right with flight
parameters displayed below the inset at
the upper right shows Stilwell's
aircraft from the perspective of the
pilot he was chasing at the time for the
most part it represents what that pilot
would have seen as he looked over his
shoulder back at Stilwell's aircraft
centered below the flight path imagery
an artificial horizon shows the pitch
and roll of the accident aircraft as it
maneuvered before the break up for his
second engagement Stilwell maneuvers in
behind the second aircraft and
eventually entered a nearly level
right-hand turn flying at approximately
450 knots that happens here rolling past
ninety degrees of bank he strains under
6.6 G's turning hard right at 18,000
feet the aircraft then shook violently
Stilwell rolled level in the forward
you sloshed broke free that's just how
long it took to happen in real time the
Accident Investigation Board president
found by clear convincing evidence the
cause of the accident was failure of the
upper right lingerie on one of four
critical support beams running
lengthwise in the aircraft launch Ron
failed to meet blueprint specifications
increasing localized stress and leading
to the formation of fatigue cracks that
weakened the structure with every flight
following the accident every f15 base
conducted a series of detailed
inspections and at least nine other
f-15s have been found out similar but
not yet fatal cracks in their lingeries
as of January 9th the Air Force approved
60% of f15 a through D models to return
to service with no flight restrictions
as for the rest the Air Force has
reported it will remove some f-15s from
its inventory as fixing those aircraft
has been deemed cost prohibitive so what
does this all mean for the Air Force is
f-15 air superiority fighter in the
words of General John DW Corley
commander of Air Combat Command this
isn't just about one pilot in one
aircraft with one bad part he said I
have a fleet that is 100% fatigued and
40% of that has bad parts the long-term
future of the f-15 he said is in
question